- [Narrator] Let us understand what type inference is.
We have introduced ourselves
to this topic in the first module
when we use the diamond operator.
In order to know this concept better
we need to know a term called type witness.
This is a way of informing the compiler
about the type argument
that you intend to use in a generic type invocation.
Let's understand this quickly with a piece of code.
Let's go back to the IDE and I will create a class
which is called test type inference.
So we do all the testing
for the type inference demos in this class.
And inside that, let's try the main method.
Let's put a comment here.
That this is the type witness demo.
Now I'll write a single line of code.
I'll grab the collections utility package.
And in that there is a method called empty list.
Now, if I just invoke this method, I do not know what type
of list is returned out of this method.
Well, the compiler already knows about it,
it has detected it, but we as observers don't know about it.
So now, I'm going to find out what is the type of list
that was returned.
And I will do that using a Java 11 feature
of the var keyboard or the var keyboard, as they say.
the var keyboard, which is this
allows you to create a local variable
without mentioning a data type to it.
So I'll say var,
and I'll give this variable a name, let's say list
and then assign collections dot empty list to that variable.
The moment I do this, you see that intelligent hint
and tells me that this is a list of object.
So now I know that this was list of object,
but all this while the compiler knew about it.
Now let's say I intended to return a list of strings
out of this method invocation.
In that case, I will have to explicitly place a pair
of angle brackets like that
in front of the name of the method
and then put in the type that I wish to use, like that.
The moment do that, the IDE is going to hint
that this is a list of string.
So this type that I mentioned in a pair of angle brackets
just before the name of the method
is called the type witness.
Where you're telling the compiler
about the type argument that you wish to use.
Now, in most of the typical coding scenarios
we do not need to do this.
That is because the compiler is smart enough
and infer these type arguments for us.
And that is through a process called type inference.
So type inference is the compiler's capability
to look at your method definition, look at its invocation
and in further type argue accordingly.
The inference algorithm runs in such a manner
that it always picks the most specific type
that satisfies both the arguments that you pass
and the written type where you collect the result.
Let's understand this with another code example.
We are going to come out of this main method
and write a method here.
Let's say, pick one, that's the name of the method.
It'll take in two objects as parameters
and return one of them at random.
So let's go ahead and write that method.
Public static.
This is a generic method.
So we'll declare the T, it returns a T as well.
And let's call this pick one
and the parameters will be T one and T two of the type T.
We'll write a simple logic inside this.
We'll say, if math dot random is greater than 0.5
then we return T one,
else we return T2.
So the math taught random call that we did on line
number 12 returns numbers between zero and one randomly.
So 50% of the times this method will return T one
the other 50% times it'll return T2.
Now let's in this method, pick one from a main method.
So let's go here on line number 10, I will put a comment
saying this is type inference demo, and let's call pick one.
Now I will pass in two arguments to this,
one is the integer type,
and the other let's say is of the double type, like that.
And let's grab the result of this method in a number type.
So now the inference algorithm will see your line number 11
which is the invocation, looks at your definition
which is line 14.
And now it wants to decide, what should be in this T.
And it has three choices.
One is the number type that we see on the return value.
The other is the in integer, which was one of the arguments.
And the third one was a double, which is the other argument.
And number is the one that will suit all three
the return as well as the arguments.
And that is why this code compiles well.
However, let's say if you try to change this type
to an integer value, like that, we get a compilation error.
It says that required type is integer
but you provided a number.
So that is a problem here.
It knows that this is an integer.
This is well is an integer, but this is a double.
And it cannot cost integer to double.
So then, that operation becomes incompatible.
And that is why it is insisting you
to change this return type.
So number is the one that will suit all three in this case.
And that's why this works well.
Let's take another example.
Let's create a fruit object.
And in order to do that
I'll have to pass in those constructive arguments.
So let's quickly do that.
Mango, India, the color was yellow
and 0.5 let's say is the weight.
This is one object.
And the other is an apple object that we create new apple.
Let's give this a name, Royal Gala Brand Apple,
the country, let's say Sweden,
green apples and weight is 0.3.
And now let's go ahead and call the pick one method.
I'm just going to scroll down a little bit
and then say pick one, we pass in fruit
and we pass in apple.
Let's also collect the result in a fruit variable,
like that.
And if you see this line works well.
So the inference algorithm is again in action.
It looks at line number 16
and it looks at your definition on line number 19.
And now it has two choices.
Fruit was the return type, fruit was also the argument
and apple was the other argument.
So now we're just trying to decide,
which is the most suitable.
And it knows,
that you can definitely cast an apple to a fruit.
So fruit is now the most suitable that it finds
among the arguments, as well as the return type.
Let's say, if we change this to apple.
We'll start getting a compilation problem.
It says, "Required type is apple, but you provided fruit."
So again, the inference is in action.
It'll look at apple as a return type, fruit as one argument
and apple is another argument.
And now the problem here is that it knows,
that it can cost an apple to fruit
but it cannot cost this fruit down to apple.
So that's why it is giving you that compilation problem
and asks you to change that return type.
So it is only going to work with fruit.
Additionally, it'll also work with any type
which is up the hierarchy of apple.
So let's say if I take boxable, like that
this will also work well
because boxable now is the one that's most suitable
for both the arguments, as well as the return type.
So this is how that inference algorithm works.
Let us also look at types of type inference.
There are three ways in which type inference works.
One is, with instantiation of generic types.
And this is done using the diamond operator.
Let's go back to the IDE.
And in our test type inference class,
let's go on the next line.
I'll put a comment here saying,
type inference with instantiation.
And here I'll write a very simple piece of code.
I'll create a box instance.
So I'll say box of fruit,
fruit box equal to new box of fruit again,
and then the constructor call.
Now the code on line number eight in is perfectly fine.
We have a variable fruit box,
which is of the type box of fruit
and the type argument used there is the fruit type.
Then on the right hand side
when we instantiated the box class
we passed the type argument fruit again.
While this code will work fine
we still want to eliminate that duplicate declaration.
So we could just do a way with the type argument here
and retain that pair of empty angle brackets.
So this pair of angle brackets, which is empty there
is the diamond operator.
And because of the diamond operator
the compiler is now going to run in inference like this.
It will look at this variable fruit box.
It knows that it is type of box of fruit.
So now it knows that the type argument is fruit
and then it enfers from this context
that it is going to be the same type argument
on the right hand side as well.
This is how type inference works
with instantiation of generic types.
Note however, that you have to use
the spare of empty angle brackets.
If you do not do that,
then you'll end up creating a raw box.
We do not want to use raw types.
So be careful about that.
So I'll just go back and insert that diamond operator again.
The next type is with method arguments.
Which means the type inference is going to infer your types
with the help of the method arguments that you pass
when you invoke the method.
So let's go back to the IDE.
So let me open the box class.
And in this class, we'll write a new method,
which is called of.
So we are trying who have this method
return a box of something.
So let's go ahead and write that method.
Public static, define the bound T extends boxable
let this method return a box of T
and let's name this method of.
And the parameter it'll take is of the type T.
So what we'll do inside is, first create an instance
of the box.
Box of T equal to new box of T.
That will be the diamond operator usage again,
after that we invoke the add item method
that we've already developed before,
and passed that incoming argument T to it,
and then return this box.
That is all.
A couple of things here,
if you observe this method, that we wrote just now
does not have any information whatsoever
of what type of box it is supposed to return.
We don't know as of now.
Secondly, you may be wondering
that we are already inside the general class box,
then why do we need to define these bounds again?
Well, this is a static method.
For static methods,
you always have to declare those bounds.
Only instance methods become automatically generic
for the generic class.
All right, so now let's go back to the test class
and we'll invoke this method.
Let's put a comment.
This is type inference with method arguments.
And let's call that box, of method.
And to this I'll pass the fruit object
that I created on line number 13, like that.
Now, when this invocation happened
I really don't know what kind of a box was created.
How do I check it?
So we will use that var option again.
And say var box and assign box of, to it.
So now you see intelligent quickly hints me
that it is a box of fruit.
Now, why is it a box of fruit?
That is because the method argument that we passed
when we invoked the of method was the fruit object.
So on the basis of this argument, the compiler inferred
that the return type must be a box of fruit.
We can do this one more time.
Let's say var another box,
and say, box dot of,
and this time let's pass the apple object.
And if you see, now intelligent tells me
that it is a box of apple.
So on the basis of the method argument that you pass
to the of method, the compiler is going to infer
what return type it'll have.
So this is how type inference with method arguments works.
Let's look at the last one,
that is with target types.
This means, that the compiler is going to infer the types
based on the target that you're using
in order to fetch the value of the method invocation.
Let's see this with an example.
Let's go back to the IDE.
And for this let us create a new method
in the boxUtils class.
We are going to write a method in boxUtils class
which is going to create an empty box for us.
So let's go ahead and say public static, same thing.
T extends boxable and let this return box of T.
Let's call this method empty box.
And we are going to do nothing special,
just return a new box of T.
That is all.
Again, this method does not have any information
of what type of empty box it is going to return.
Now let's go ahead and test this out.
Let's go to test type inference on the next line.
First, I'll put a comment.
This is type inference with target types.
And now let's invoke the boxUtils dot empty box method.
So again, when this invocation happens on line 25,
I don't know what type of empty box it is.
So let's go ahead and use the var option again
in order to find out.
Let's say, box equal to.
It's a duplicate variable.
Let's go ahead and say empty box.
And if you see, intelligent gave me the hint
that it is a box of boxable
but then you see there is no argument
and there was no return type that was captured correctly.
So then how is this box of boxable?
That is because if you go back to the empty box method again
and you see the bounds defined here,
they say T extends boxable.
So that's how it picks up
the boxable type to be the return type.
And that's why you see box of boxable
that was hinted by the intelligent IDE.
Now we'll change this code to something like this.
We eliminate the var option.
And instead we'll say, box of fruit.
Fruit box one.
And now if you see the empty box invocation
yielded me available fruit box one,
which is of type box of fruit,
and this code compiles perfectly well.
So this means that this time the compiler inferred the type
based on the target variable
inside which you fetched the result
of the method invocation.
So this is type inference with the target types.
Let's try one more time.
Box of, let's say apple
call this apple box and then say, boxUtils dot empty box.
You see this code compiles perfectly well again
and this time, the empty box that was returned
out of that method invocation, was a box of apple.
How?
Because the target type was box of apple.
So based on this target type, the compiler inferred
that you are trying to return an empty box of apples.
So this is how type inference works based
on the target types.